In 1889, the Eiffel Tower became the
[music] tallest structure on Earth. But
height wasn't its only challenge. Behind
its elegant iron lattice lies one of the
most unusual elevator systems ever
conceived. Because the tower doesn't go
straight up, moving thousands of
visitors each day, demanded a complete
rethink of elevator design. Engineers
answered with a series of bold
experimental machines. Some so
unconventional they could only exist
[music] in the 1890s. Without these, the
tower's upper levels would have been
nearly impossible to reach. But the
innovation doesn't end there. The tower
is packed with hidden engineering
solutions. Systems designed [music] to
solve problems no structure had faced
before. To understand how they work,
we've spent hundreds of hours rebuilding
the Eiffel Tower piece by piece,
uncovering how its design has evolved
for more than a century.
Rising from the heart of Paris, France,
[music] the Eiffel Tower was built as
the centerpiece of the 1889 World's Fair
to celebrate the 100th anniversary of
the French Revolution. The tower stands
between the Sen River to the northwest
and the Shaw de Mars, a vast public
green space stretching out to the
southeast. The tower takes its name from
engineer Gustav Eiffel, whose company
was responsible for both [music] its
design and construction. Under his
direction, the project moved at an
astonishing pace. From start to finish,
the Eiffel Tower was completed in just 2
years and 2 months. As it rose, it
shattered records. During construction,
it overtook the Washington Monument,
then the tallest structure in the world
at [music]
169 m to become the tallest human-made
structure ever built, reaching an
unprecedented height of 312 m and
breaking both the 200 m and 300 m height
barriers. It held that title for 41
years [music] until New York City's
Chrysler building surpassed it in 1930
at 319 m. In 1957, a broadcasting
antenna was added to its summit, making
it taller than the Chrysler building.
Though by then, the Empire State
Building had already claimed the record.
Today, the Eiffel Tower's impact is
measured not just in meters, but in
visitors. It is the most visited paid
monument in the world, welcoming around
7 million people every year, all drawn
to a structure that redefined what was
possible when it first pierced the Paris
skyline.
What stands in Paris today, however, is
not quite the tower that opened in 1889.
And that becomes clear as you start to
peel back the layers. For more than a
century, the Eiffel Tower has been
constantly renovated, refined, and
adapted to handle an ever growing number
of visitors. At its core, the Eiffel
Tower is a rot iron lattice structure
shaped like a massive pylon. Four
pillars spread wide at the base and
gradually converge as they rise, joined
together by girders at regular
intervals. This open frame design isn't
just iconic. It was carefully optimized
for wind resistance. The lattice allows
air to pass through the structure,
reducing pressure and helping the tower
withstand powerful gusts. Every piece of
metal in the tower is held together with
rivets, not welds, which was standard
practice at the time of construction. In
total, 2.5 million rivets hold the
structure together. The tower has a
square base measuring 125 m on each
side, and today it stands 330 m tall. In
2022, a digital radio antenna was
installed, bringing the tower to its
current height. The tower's color has
also evolved over time. Today, it
appears in a yellow brown shade, but
that wasn't always the case. When it
opened in 1889, the Eiffel Tower was
painted reddish brown. Over the years,
it was repainted multiple times,
shifting from red to yellow and then
through several different shades of
brown before settling on its current
tone. Every evening, the tower comes
alive with light. It's illuminated
nightly, and at the start of every hour,
it [music] sparkles for 5 minutes, a
familiar ritual that has become
synonymous with Paris itself. Beneath it
all, the foundation is just as carefully
engineered. Each of the towers four
pillars sits on four massive masonry
blocks that extend about 7 m below
ground. The tops of these blocks are
inclined to support the main girders of
each pillar, and each block sits a top a
large concrete footing beneath it. The
Eiffel Tower has three public floors.
The first floor [music] sits at a height
of 57 m and is accessible by stairs or
elevator, which we'll explore in detail
later. This level contains three modern
red buildings with glass facads on both
sides, housing event spaces, a
restaurant, shops, and an [music]
exhibition area. When the tower first
opened, this level looked very
different. It featured four wooden
pavilions, each containing a restaurant
that could seat [music] 500 people. Over
time, multiple pavilions have come and
gone. Running along the outer edge of
the first floor is a roofed [music]
sightseeing gallery that wraps around
the structure just a few steps below the
main level. On the four sides of the
tower, just below this gallery are 72
engraved names. French scientists
honored for their contributions included
as a tribute from Gustav Eiffel to the
scientific world. At the center of the
first floor is a large opening. Along
its edge is a walkway with glass
guardrails and glass flooring offering a
straight down view to the ground below.
To put the scale into perspective, the
opening is large enough to fit the
entire Statue of Liberty, and it still
wouldn't reach the second floor, which
stands at 115 m. Like the first floor,
the second floor is accessible by stairs
or elevator, and it is split into two
sightseeing levels. Above the upper
level sits the Jules Vern restaurant
[music] which opened in 1983. It's a
gourmet restaurant with two Michelin
stars and is accessed by a dedicated
elevator from the ground. Reaching the
third floor was anything but
straightforward. Getting people there
forced engineers into a solution that
still shapes the tower today. An
intermediate level between the second
and third floors. Closed to the public
and never intended for sightseeing, it
played a critical role in the tower's
original elevator system. It's details
like this that reveal just how much is
happening inside the Eiffel Tower, which
inspired [music] us to create this
Eiffel Tower poster, mapping out its
every detail. Grab yours through the
link in the description. Every purchase
directly supports the channel and the
team behind it. We're also giving
[music] one away. For a chance to win
one, like this video, subscribe, and
comment below. What surprised you most
about the Eiffel Tower? We'll announce
the winner in the next video. And a
quick shout out to our last giveaway
winner. Congratulations.
The third and top floor sits at 276 m
and is accessible only by elevator. The
stairs here are reserved for emergency
use only. The third floor is divided
into two public levels. On the lower
level, the elevators arrive at an
outdoor observation gallery with windows
on all sides providing breathtaking
panoramic views of Paris. Two staircases
lead up to the upper level, which is the
highest public space on the tower. An
[snorts] open air observation platform
surrounds a central structure that
houses a reconstructed portion of Gustav
Eiffel's original office. This space was
once part of a much larger apartment,
which was gradually removed to [music]
make room for technical facilities. The
original apartment included a living
room, kitchen, offices, laboratories,
and a bathroom with the primary purpose
of receiving distinguished [music]
guests and conducting scientific
experiments. Above this are non-public
levels that contain essential elevator
machinery and communications equipment
for the antennas overhead. Since the
tower's completion in 1889, [music] the
top has changed significantly as
antennas and broadcasting equipment were
added, [music] gradually increasing its
height and altering its silhouette.
Moving people through a structure that
doesn't go straight up demanded
solutions unlike anything used before.
And over time, the Eiffel Tower's
elevators evolve in remarkably different
ways. Some systems were replaced
entirely, while [music] others,
commissioned back in 1899, remain in
operation today. Today, the [music]
Eiffel Tower operates seven elevators,
each adapted to the tower's unusual
geometry and increasing visitor demands.
[music] Inside each of the towers four
inclined pillars is a unique elevator
system that travels between the ground
and the second floor. These elevators
are neither traditional vertical lifts
nor ficiculars or cable cars. Instead,
they are customuilt systems designed
specifically to follow the tower's
sloping legs. The elevators travel along
inclined tracks [music] set at 54° up to
the first floor, then steepening to 74°
up to the second floor. Three of these
elevators are used by visitors and are
located in the north, east, and west
pillars. Each system consists of two
passenger cabins stacked vertically on a
single carriage which moves along rails
inside the pillar, similar to a train
car, but on a steep incline. As the
angle of the track changes during the
ascent, the cabins are kept perfectly
level. Traction cables attached to
either side of the carriage pull it
upward. These cables pass over large
pulleys at the second floor before
descending back down to the drive
systems located [music] at the base of
each pillar. Systems we'll look at in
detail shortly. The south pillar uses a
slightly different arrangement. Here,
two smaller single car elevators are
installed side by [music] side. One
elevator is reserved exclusively for
guests of the Jules Vern restaurant on
the second floor, while the other is a
freight elevator used by Eiffel Tower
staff. Between the second and third
floors are two elevators, each
consisting of two paired cars. When one
car ascends, the other descends,
counterbalancing each other during
operation. [music] When the tower first
opened, five hydraulic elevators were
placed into service, one in each of the
four pillars and one operating between
the second and third floors. These early
elevators relied on three different
systems, all supplied by different
companies [music] and powered by
pressurized water. For the first 10
years, the power needed to run these
elevators came from [music] steam
engines installed in a machine room
beneath the south pillar. But what was
actually happening inside this hidden
machine room? We break it down in a
separate video available now exclusively
to our YouTube and Patreon members.
Placing a vertical elevator shaft
anywhere within the open area beneath
the first floor was [music]
aesthetically unthinkable. So engineers
were forced to place elevators inside
the tower's inclined legs, creating one
of the greatest engineering challenges
of the project. All pillar elevators
followed the same fundamental idea still
used today. Two passenger cabins stacked
vertically on a carriage traveling along
inclined tracks. However, two very
different systems were installed by two
different companies. The elevators
installed in the east and west pillars
were supplied by the French company Ru
Kumbaluzier Elap. They could only reach
the first floor and were highly
unconventional even for their time.
Instead of cables, the system relied on
two endless chains made of rigid
articulated links. The passenger
carriage was attached to these chains
and was pushed from below rather than
pulled from above. At the base of each
pillar, the chains were driven by two
large diameter sprockets, while idler
sprockets on the first floor guided the
chains back downward. These drive
sprockets were powered by two large
hydraulic cylinders installed
horizontally and parallel to each other
at the base of the pillar. A separate
set of smaller chains transmitted motion
from the hydraulic cylinders to the
drive sprockets. Pulley mounted to the
ends of the piston rods guided these
chains. One end of each chain was fixed
to the [music] machine frame, while the
free end passed beneath the cylinders
and wrapped around smaller sprockets,
which in turn rotated the main drive
sprockets. As the piston rods extended,
the free ends of the chains moved in the
opposite direction, turning the
sprockets and raising or lowering the
passenger carriage. Despite its
ingenuity, the system lacked speed and
reliability and remained in service only
until 1897.
Next, the elevators in the north and
south pillars were supplied by the
American company Otus. These systems
were cabled driven and powered by a
single large inclined hydraulic
cylinder. Rather than moving the
passenger carriage directly, the piston
rod drove a separate carriage fitted
with counterwes and pulleys. This
carriage traveled along an inclined
track positioned above and parallel to
the lower section of the passenger
carriage path. A second set of pulleys
was fixed higher up inside the pillar.
The cables moving the passenger carriage
were threaded through both sets, forming
an arrangement similar to a block and
tackle system that multiplied its
motion, allowing a short piston stroke
to lift the carriage over a much greater
distance. Today, the North Pillar
elevator has been fully modernized.
While the original hydraulic system has
been replaced by an electric drive, the
elevator still operates on the same
basic principle with passenger and
counterweight carriages connected by
cables running through pulleys. In the
1980s, the south pillar was equipped
with the two smaller singlecar elevators
seen today.
Going back to the east and west pillars
to replace the Ruse system that was
first put in place. Elevators supplied
by the French company Feeves Leela were
installed in 1899.
These new elevators could reach the
second floor unlike their predecessors.
And remarkably, they are still in
service today. The system uses cables
driven by two large horizontal hydraulic
cylinders, each 16 m long, installed
underground beneath each pillar. Each
piston rod pushes a drive carriage that
runs horizontally on tracks and carries
multiple pulleys. A second set of
pulleys is fixed at the rear end of each
hydraulic cylinder. As with the north
pillar elevator, the cables moving the
passenger carriage were threaded through
both sets of pulleys, multiplying the
motion. A 1 m movement of the drive
carriage results in an 8 m movement of
the passenger carriage. Until 1986, the
hydraulic cylinders were driven by a
system powered by three massive
cylindrical weight accumulators. After
modernization, high-pressure oil
hydraulic motors replace the original
system, driving the carriage through a
rack and pinion [music] mechanism. Two
of the three historic accumulators now
serve solely as counterweights. Today, a
mannequin occupies the operator's former
position beneath the lower cabin,
demonstrating how the elevator was once
manually controlled before full
automation.
Finally, the original vertical elevator
between the second and third floors was
supplied by the French company Edu. In
1889, no elevator could travel the full
160 m [music] between these levels in a
single run. To solve this, engineers
installed two 80 m hydraulic cylinders
at the second level, extending nearly
halfway to the third floor. One elevator
car sat at top these cylinders and
traveled between the intermediate level
and the third floor. Cables ran from the
top of this car over [music] pulleys at
the third level and back down to a
second car operating between the second
floor and the intermediate level. The
two cars acted as counterweights for
each other with each cabin traveling
only half the total height. Passengers
had to step off at the intermediate
level, cross a short gangway, and
transfer to the second car to continue
upward. This system was later replaced
to improve efficiency. Today's elevators
between the second and third floors
still use paired cars that
counterbalance each other, but now each
travels the full distance, driven by an
electric motor installed at the third
floor level. Today, the Eiffel Tower's
elevators travel a combined 103,000 km
each year, or about two and a half times
around the world. When the Eiffel Tower
was conceived for the 1889 World's Fair,
it was never meant to be permanent.
Built with a permit that lasted just 20
years, the plan was simple. After two
decades, the tower would be dismantled
and removed from the Paris skyline.
Gustav Eiffel understood [music] that
the only way to save it was to prove its
usefulness. Under his direction, the
tower became a living laboratory.
Scientists carried out meteorological
and astronomical observations, physics
experiments, and wind studies high above
the city. But in the end, it was a new
technology that truly secured the
tower's future. Eiffel successfully
reimagined the structure as a powerful
platform for wireless transmission by
promoting it as an ideal support for
radio antennas. The tower gained a vital
scientific role that made demolition
unthinkable. And its impact didn't stop
at Paris. The Eiffel Tower inspired
cities around the world to dream just as
big. In London, plans were drawn up for
a rival iron lattice [music] tower,
Watkins Tower, intended to surpass the
Eiffel Tower in height. Construction
began in 1892, but the project was never
completed. More than a century later,
the Eiffel Tower has far outlived its
original purpose. What began as a
temporary exhibition structure now
stands as both a global symbol of Paris
[music] and a working piece of
infrastructure, continuously adapted,
continuously used, and still rising
above the city more than 130 years after
it was built. But there is another
famous structure, one that has presided
over a city for 2,000 years. For
centuries, [music] most people that
stepped foot there didn't know what
lurked beneath. But after hundreds of
hours of research and modeling, we can
now show [music] you exactly what lies
hidden within the coliseum. Thanks for
watching. Stay curious.